## Calling User-Defined Functions

To evaluate a call expression whose operator names a user-defined function, the Python interpreter follows a computational process. As with any call expression, the interpreter evaluates the operator and operand expressions, and then applies the named function to the resulting arguments.

Applying a user-defined function introduces a second *local* frame, which is only accessible to that function. To apply a user-defined function to some arguments:

1. Bind the arguments to the names of the function's formal parameters in a new *local* frame.
2. Execute the body of the function in the environment that starts with this frame.

The environment in which the body is evaluated consists of two frames: first the local frame that contains formal parameter bindings, then the global frame that contains everything else. Each instance of a function application has its own independent local frame.

To illustrate an example in detail, several steps of the environment diagram for the same example are depicted below. After executing the first import statement, only the name `mul` is bound in the global frame.

<iframe width="800" height="500" frameborder="0" src="https://pythontutor.com/iframe-embed.html#code=from%20operator%20import%20mul%0Adef%20square%28x%29%3A%0A%20%20%20%20return%20mul%28x,%20x%29%0Asquare%28-2%29&codeDivHeight=400&codeDivWidth=350&cumulative=false&curInstr=1&heapPrimitives=nevernest&origin=opt-frontend.js&py=3&rawInputLstJSON=%5B%5D&textReferences=false"> </iframe>

First, the definition statement for the function `square` is executed. Notice that the entire `def` statement is processed in a single step. The body of a function is not executed until the function is called (not when it is defined).

<iframe width="800" height="500" frameborder="0" src="https://pythontutor.com/iframe-embed.html#code=from%20operator%20import%20mul%0Adef%20square%28x%29%3A%0A%20%20%20%20return%20mul%28x,%20x%29%0Asquare%28-2%29&codeDivHeight=400&codeDivWidth=350&cumulative=false&curInstr=2&heapPrimitives=nevernest&origin=opt-frontend.js&py=3&rawInputLstJSON=%5B%5D&textReferences=false"> </iframe>

Next, The `square` function is called with the argument `-2`, and so a new frame is created with the formal parameter `x` bound to the value `-2`.

<iframe width="800" height="500" frameborder="0" src="https://pythontutor.com/iframe-embed.html#code=from%20operator%20import%20mul%0Adef%20square%28x%29%3A%0A%20%20%20%20return%20mul%28x,%20x%29%0Asquare%28-2%29&codeDivHeight=400&codeDivWidth=350&cumulative=false&curInstr=3&heapPrimitives=nevernest&origin=opt-frontend.js&py=3&rawInputLstJSON=%5B%5D&textReferences=false"> </iframe>

Then, the name `x` is looked up in the current environment, which consists of the two frames shown. In both occurrences, `x` evaluates to `-2`, and so the `square` function returns 4.

<iframe width="800" height="500" frameborder="0" src="https://pythontutor.com/iframe-embed.html#code=from%20operator%20import%20mul%0Adef%20square%28x%29%3A%0A%20%20%20%20return%20mul%28x,%20x%29%0Asquare%28-2%29&codeDivHeight=400&codeDivWidth=350&cumulative=false&curInstr=4&heapPrimitives=nevernest&origin=opt-frontend.js&py=3&rawInputLstJSON=%5B%5D&textReferences=false"> </iframe>

The "Return value" in the `square()` frame is not a name binding; instead it indicates the value returned by the function call that created the frame.

Even in this simple example, two different environments are used. The top-level expression `square(-2)` is evaluated in the global environment, while the return expression `mul(x, x)` is evaluated in the environment created for by calling `square`. Both `x` and `mul` are bound in this environment, but in different frames.

The order of frames in an environment affects the value returned by looking up a name in an expression. We stated previously that a name is evaluated to the value associated with that name in the current environment. We can now be more precise:

**Name Evaluation.** A name evaluates to the value bound to that name in the earliest frame of the current environment in which that name is found.

Our conceptual framework of environments, names, and functions constitutes a *model of evaluation*; while some mechanical details are still unspecified (e.g., how a binding is implemented), our model does precisely and correctly describe how the interpreter evaluates call expressions. In Chapter 3 we will see how this model can serve as a blueprint for implementing a working interpreter for a programming language.

## Example: Calling a User-Defined Function

Let us again consider our two simple function definitions and illustrate the process that evaluates a call expression for a user-defined function.

<iframe width="800" height="500" frameborder="0" src="https://pythontutor.com/iframe-embed.html#code=from%20operator%20import%20add,%20mul%0Adef%20square%28x%29%3A%0A%20%20%20%20return%20mul%28x,%20x%29%0A%0Adef%20sum_squares%28x,%20y%29%3A%0A%20%20%20%20return%20add%28square%28x%29,%20square%28y%29%29%0A%0Aresult%20%3D%20sum_squares%285,%2012%29&codeDivHeight=400&codeDivWidth=350&cumulative=false&curInstr=3&heapPrimitives=nevernest&origin=opt-frontend.js&py=3&rawInputLstJSON=%5B%5D&textReferences=false"> </iframe>

Python first evaluates the name `sum_squares`, which is bound to a user-defined function in the global frame. The primitive numeric expressions 5 and 12 evaluate to the numbers they represent.

Next, Python applies `sum_squares`, which introduces a local frame that binds x to 5 and y to 12.

<iframe width="800" height="500" frameborder="0" src="https://pythontutor.com/iframe-embed.html#code=from%20operator%20import%20add,%20mul%0Adef%20square%28x%29%3A%0A%20%20%20%20return%20mul%28x,%20x%29%0A%0Adef%20sum_squares%28x,%20y%29%3A%0A%20%20%20%20return%20add%28square%28x%29,%20square%28y%29%29%0A%0Aresult%20%3D%20sum_squares%285,%2012%29&codeDivHeight=400&codeDivWidth=350&cumulative=false&curInstr=4&heapPrimitives=nevernest&origin=opt-frontend.js&py=3&rawInputLstJSON=%5B%5D&textReferences=false"> </iframe>

The body of `sum_squares` contains this call expression:

```
  add     (  square(x)  ,  square(y)  )
________     _________     _________
operator     operand 0     operand 1
```

All three subexpressions are evaluated in the current environment, which begins with the frame labeled `sum_squares()`. The operator subexpression `add` is a name found in the global frame, bound to the built-in function for addition. The two operand subexpressions must be evaluated in turn, before addition is applied. Both operands are evaluated in the current environment beginning with the frame labeled `sum_squares`.

In `operand 0`, `square` names a user-defined function in the global frame, while `x` names the number 5 in the local frame. Python applies `square` to 5 by introducing yet another local frame that binds x to 5.

<iframe width="800" height="500" frameborder="0" src="https://pythontutor.com/iframe-embed.html#code=from%20operator%20import%20add,%20mul%0Adef%20square%28x%29%3A%0A%20%20%20%20return%20mul%28x,%20x%29%0A%0Adef%20sum_squares%28x,%20y%29%3A%0A%20%20%20%20return%20add%28square%28x%29,%20square%28y%29%29%0A%0Aresult%20%3D%20sum_squares%285,%2012%29&codeDivHeight=400&codeDivWidth=350&cumulative=false&curInstr=5&heapPrimitives=nevernest&origin=opt-frontend.js&py=3&rawInputLstJSON=%5B%5D&textReferences=false"> </iframe>

Using this environment, the expression `mul(x, x)` evaluates to 25.

Our evaluation procedure now turns to `operand 1`, for which `y` names the number 12. Python evaluates the body of `square` again, this time introducing yet another local frame that binds `x` to 12. Hence, `operand 1` evaluates to 144.

<iframe width="800" height="500" frameborder="0" src="https://pythontutor.com/iframe-embed.html#code=from%20operator%20import%20add,%20mul%0Adef%20square%28x%29%3A%0A%20%20%20%20return%20mul%28x,%20x%29%0A%0Adef%20sum_squares%28x,%20y%29%3A%0A%20%20%20%20return%20add%28square%28x%29,%20square%28y%29%29%0A%0Aresult%20%3D%20sum_squares%285,%2012%29&codeDivHeight=400&codeDivWidth=350&cumulative=false&curInstr=8&heapPrimitives=nevernest&origin=opt-frontend.js&py=3&rawInputLstJSON=%5B%5D&textReferences=false"> </iframe>

Finally, applying addition to the arguments 25 and 144 yields a final return value for `sum_squares`: 169.

<iframe width="800" height="500" frameborder="0" src="https://pythontutor.com/iframe-embed.html#code=from%20operator%20import%20add,%20mul%0Adef%20square%28x%29%3A%0A%20%20%20%20return%20mul%28x,%20x%29%0A%0Adef%20sum_squares%28x,%20y%29%3A%0A%20%20%20%20return%20add%28square%28x%29,%20square%28y%29%29%0A%0Aresult%20%3D%20sum_squares%285,%2012%29&codeDivHeight=400&codeDivWidth=350&cumulative=false&curInstr=13&heapPrimitives=nevernest&origin=opt-frontend.js&py=3&rawInputLstJSON=%5B%5D&textReferences=false"> </iframe>

This example illustrates many of the fundamental ideas we have developed so far. Names are bound to values, which are distributed across many independent local frames, along with a single global frame that contains shared names. A new local frame is introduced every time a function is called, even if the same function is called twice.

All of this machinery exists to ensure that names resolve to the correct values at the correct times during program execution. This example illustrates why our model requires the complexity that we have introduced. All three local frames contain a binding for the name `x`, but that name is bound to different values in different frames. Local frames keep these names separate.

## Local Names

One detail of a function's implementation that should not affect the function's behavior is the implementer's choice of names for the function's formal parameters. Thus, the following functions should provide the same behavior:

```python
>>> def square(x):
        return mul(x, x)
>>> def square(y):
        return mul(y, y)
```

This principle -- that the meaning of a function should be independent of the parameter names chosen by its author -- has important consequences for programming languages. The simplest consequence is that the parameter names of a function must remain local to the body of the function.

If the parameters were not local to the bodies of their respective functions, then the parameter `x` in `square` could be confused with the parameter `x` in `sum_squares`. Critically, this is not the case: the binding for `x` in different local frames are unrelated. The model of computation is carefully designed to ensure this independence.

We say that the *scope* of a local name is limited to the body of the user-defined function that defines it. When a name is no longer accessible, it is out of scope. This scoping behavior isn't a new fact about our model; it is a consequence of the way environments work.

## Choosing Names

The interchangeability of names does not imply that formal parameter names do not matter at all. On the contrary, well-chosen function and parameter names are essential for the human interpretability of function definitions!

The following guidelines are adapted from the [style guide for Python code](http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008), which serves as a guide for all (non-rebellious) Python programmers. A shared set of conventions smooths communication among members of a developer community. As a side effect of following these conventions, you will find that your code becomes more internally consistent.

1. Function names are lowercase, with words separated by underscores. Descriptive names are encouraged.
2. Function names typically evoke operations applied to arguments by the interpreter (e.g., `print`, `add`, `square`) or the name of the quantity that results (e.g., `max`, `abs`, `sum`).
3. Parameter names are lowercase, with words separated by underscores. Single-word names are preferred.
4. Parameter names should evoke the role of the parameter in the function, not just the kind of argument that is allowed.
5. Single letter parameter names are acceptable when their role is obvious, but avoid "l" (lowercase ell), "O" (capital oh), or "I" (capital i) to avoid confusion with numerals.

There are many exceptions to these guidelines, even in the Python standard library. Like the vocabulary of the English language, Python has inherited words from a variety of contributors, and the result is not always consistent.

## Functions as Abstractions

Though it is very simple, `sum_squares` exemplifies the most powerful property of user-defined functions. The function `sum_squares` is defined in terms of the function `square`, but relies only on the relationship that `square` defines between its input arguments and its output values.

We can write `sum_squares` without concerning ourselves with *how* to square a number. The details of how the square is computed can be suppressed, to be considered at a later time. Indeed, as far as `sum_squares` is concerned, `square` is not a particular function body, but rather an abstraction of a function, a so-called functional abstraction. At this level of abstraction, any function that computes the square is equally good.

Thus, considering only the values they return, the following two functions for squaring a number should be indistinguishable. Each takes a numerical argument and produces the square of that number as the value.

```python
>>> def square(x):
        return mul(x, x)
>>> def square(x):
        return mul(x, x-1) + x
```

In other words, a function definition should be able to suppress details. The users of the function may not have written the function themselves, but may have obtained it from another programmer as a "black box". A programmer should not need to know how the function is implemented in order to use it. The Python Library has this property. Many developers use the functions defined there, but few ever inspect their implementation.

**Aspects of a functional abstraction.** To master the use of a functional abstraction, it is often useful to consider its three core attributes. The *domain* of a function is the set of arguments it can take. The *range* of a function is the set of values it can return. The *intent* of a function is the relationship it computes between inputs and output (as well as any side effects it might generate). Understanding functional abstractions via their domain, range, and intent is critical to using them correctly in a complex program.

For example, any `square` function that we use to implement `sum_squares` should have these attributes:

- The *domain* is any single real number.
- The *range* is any non-negative real number.
- The *intent* is that the output is the square of the input.

These attributes do not specify how the intent is carried out; that detail is abstracted away.

## Operators

Mathematical operators (such as `+` and `-`) provided our first example of a method of combination, but we have yet to define an evaluation procedure for expressions that contain these operators.

Python expressions with infix operators each have their own evaluation procedures, but you can often think of them as short-hand for call expressions. When you see

```python
>>> 2 + 3
5
```

simply consider it to be short-hand for

```python
>>> add(2, 3)
5
```

Infix notation can be nested, just like call expressions. Python applies the normal mathematical rules of operator precedence, which dictate how to interpret a compound expression with multiple operators.

```python
>>> 2 + 3 * 4 + 5
19
```

evaluates to the same result as

```python
>>> add(add(2, mul(3, 4)), 5)
19
```

The nesting in the call expression is more explicit than the operator version, but also harder to read. Python also allows subexpression grouping with parentheses, to override the normal precedence rules or make the nested structure of an expression more explicit.

```python
>>> (2 + 3) * (4 + 5)
45
```

evaluates to the same result as

```python
>>> mul(add(2, 3), add(4, 5))
45
```

When it comes to division, Python provides two infix operators: `/` and `//`. The former is normal division, so that it results in a *floating point*, or decimal value, even if the divisor evenly divides the dividend:

```python
>>> 5 / 4
1.25
>>> 8 / 4
2.0
```

The `//` operator, on the other hand, rounds the result down to an integer:

```python
>>> 5 // 4
1
>>> -5 // 4
-2
```

These two operators are shorthand for the `truediv` and `floordiv` functions.

```python
>>> from operator import truediv, floordiv
>>> truediv(5, 4)
1.25
>>> floordiv(5, 4)
1
```

You should feel free to use infix operators and parentheses in your programs. Idiomatic Python prefers operators over call expressions for simple mathematical operations.

## Designing Functions

Functions are an essential ingredient of all programs, large and small, and serve as our primary medium to express computational processes in a programming language. So far, we have discussed the formal properties of functions and how they are applied. We now turn to the topic of what makes a good function. Fundamentally, the qualities of good functions all reinforce the idea that functions are abstractions.

- Each function should have exactly one job. That job should be identifiable with a short name and characterizable in a single line of text. Functions that perform multiple jobs in sequence should be divided into multiple functions.
- *Don't repeat yourself* is a central tenet of software engineering. The so-called DRY principle states that multiple fragments of code should not describe redundant logic. Instead, that logic should be implemented once, given a name, and applied multiple times. If you find yourself copying and pasting a block of code, you have probably found an opportunity for functional abstraction.
- Functions should be defined generally. Squaring is not in the Python Library precisely because it is a special case of the `pow` function, which raises numbers to arbitrary powers.

These guidelines improve the readability of code, reduce the number of errors, and often minimize the total amount of code written. Decomposing a complex task into concise functions is a skill that takes experience to master. Fortunately, Python provides several features to support your efforts.

## Documentation

A function definition will often include documentation describing the function, called a *docstring*, which must be indented along with the function body. Docstrings are conventionally triple quoted. The first line describes the job of the function in one line. The following lines can describe arguments and clarify the behavior of the function:

```python
>>> def pressure(v, t, n):
        """Compute the pressure in pascals of an ideal gas.

        Applies the ideal gas law: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ideal_gas_law

        v -- volume of gas, in cubic meters
        t -- absolute temperature in degrees kelvin
        n -- particles of gas
        """
        k = 1.38e-23  # Boltzmann's constant
        return n * k * t / v
```

When you call `help` with the name of a function as an argument, you see its docstring (type `q` to quit Python help).

```python
>>> help(pressure)
```

When writing Python programs, include docstrings for all but the simplest functions. Remember, code is written only once, but often read many times. The Python docs include [docstring guidelines](http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0257/) that maintain consistency across different Python projects.

**Comments**. Comments in Python can be attached to the end of a line following the `#` symbol. For example, the comment `Boltzmann's constant` above describes `k`. These comments don't ever appear in Python's `help`, and they are ignored by the interpreter. They exist for humans alone.

## Default Argument Values

A consequence of defining general functions is the introduction of additional arguments. Functions with many arguments can be awkward to call and difficult to read.

In Python, we can provide default values for the arguments of a function. When calling that function, arguments with default values are optional. If they are not provided, then the default value is bound to the formal parameter name instead. For instance, if an application commonly computes pressure for one mole of particles, this value can be provided as a default:

```python
>>> def pressure(v, t, n=6.022e23):
        """Compute the pressure in pascals of an ideal gas.

        v -- volume of gas, in cubic meters
        t -- absolute temperature in degrees kelvin
        n -- particles of gas (default: one mole)
        """
        k = 1.38e-23  # Boltzmann's constant
        return n * k * t / v
```

The `=` symbol means two different things in this example, depending on the context in which it is used. In the `def` statement header, `=` does not perform assignment, but instead indicates a default value to use when the `pressure` function is called. By contrast, the assignment statement to `k` in the body of the function binds the name `k` to an approximation of Boltzmann's constant.

```python
>>> pressure(1, 273.15)
2269.974834
>>> pressure(1, 273.15, 3 * 6.022e23)
6809.924502
```

The `pressure` function is defined to take three arguments, but only two are provided in the first call expression above. In this case, the value for `n` is taken from the `def` statement default. If a third argument is provided, the default is ignored.

As a guideline, most data values used in a function's body should be expressed as default values to named arguments, so that they are easy to inspect and can be changed by the function caller. Some values that never change, such as the fundamental constant `k`, can be bound in the function body or in the global frame.

## Control

The expressive power of the functions that we can define at this point is very limited, because we have not introduced a way to make comparisons and to perform different operations depending on the result of a comparison. *Control statements* will give us this ability. They are statements that control the flow of a program's execution based on the results of logical comparisons.

Statements differ fundamentally from the expressions that we have studied so far. They have no value. Instead of computing something, executing a control statement determines what the interpreter should do next.

## Statements

So far, we have primarily considered how to evaluate expressions. However, we have seen three kinds of statements already: assignment, `def`, and `return` statements. These lines of Python code are not themselves expressions, although they all contain expressions as components.

Rather than being evaluated, statements are *executed*. Each statement describes some change to the interpreter state, and executing a statement applies that change. As we have seen for `return` and assignment statements, executing statements can involve evaluating subexpressions contained within them.

Expressions can also be executed as statements, in which case they are evaluated, but their value is discarded. Executing a pure function has no effect, but executing a non-pure function can cause effects as a consequence of function application.

Consider, for instance,

```python
>>> def square(x):
        mul(x, x) # Watch out! This call doesn't return a value.
```

This example is valid Python, but probably not what was intended. The body of the function consists of an expression. An expression by itself is a valid statement, but the effect of the statement is that the `mul` function is called, and the result is discarded. If you want to do something with the result of an expression, you need to say so: you might store it with an assignment statement or return it with a return statement:

```python
>>> def square(x):
        return mul(x, x)
```

Sometimes it does make sense to have a function whose body is an expression, when a non-pure function like `print` is called.

```python
>>> def print_square(x):
        print(square(x))
```

At its highest level, the Python interpreter's job is to execute programs, composed of statements. However, much of the interesting work of computation comes from evaluating expressions. Statements govern the relationship among different expressions in a program and what happens to their results.

## Compound Statements

In general, Python code is a sequence of statements. A simple statement is a single line that doesn't end in a colon. A compound statement is so called because it is composed of other statements (simple and compound). Compound statements typically span multiple lines and start with a one-line header ending in a colon, which identifies the type of statement. Together, a header and an indented suite of statements is called a clause. A compound statement consists of one or more clauses:

```python
<header>:
    <statement>
    <statement>
    ...
<separating header>:
    <statement>
    <statement>
    ...
...
```

We can understand the statements we have already introduced in these terms.

- Expressions, return statements, and assignment statements are simple statements.
- A `def` statement is a compound statement. The suite that follows the `def` header defines the function body.

Specialized evaluation rules for each kind of header dictate when and if the statements in its suite are executed. We say that the header controls its suite. For example, in the case of `def` statements, we saw that the return expression is not evaluated immediately, but instead stored for later use when the defined function is eventually called.

We can also understand multi-line programs now.

- To execute a sequence of statements, execute the first statement. If that statement does not redirect control, then proceed to execute the rest of the sequence of statements, if any remain.

This definition exposes the essential structure of a recursively defined *sequence*: a sequence can be decomposed into its first element and the rest of its elements. The "rest" of a sequence of statements is itself a sequence of statements! Thus, we can recursively apply this execution rule. This view of sequences as recursive data structures will appear again in later chapters.

The important consequence of this rule is that statements are executed in order, but later statements may never be reached, because of redirected control.

**Practical Guidance.** When indenting a suite, all lines must be indented the same amount and in the same way (use spaces, not tabs). Any variation in indentation will cause an error.

## Defining Functions II: Local Assignment

Originally, we stated that the body of a user-defined function consisted only of a `return` statement with a single return expression. In fact, functions can define a sequence of operations that extends beyond a single expression.

Whenever a user-defined function is applied, the sequence of clauses in the suite of its definition is executed in a local environment — an environment starting with a local frame created by calling that function. A `return` statement redirects control: the process of function application terminates whenever the first `return` statement is executed, and the value of the `return` expression is the returned value of the function being applied.

Assignment statements can appear within a function body. For instance, this function returns the absolute difference between two quantities as a percentage of the first, using a two-step calculation:

<iframe width="800" height="500" frameborder="0" src="https://pythontutor.com/iframe-embed.html#code=def%20percent_difference%28x,%20y%29%3A%0A%20%20%20%20difference%20%3D%20abs%28x-y%29%0A%20%20%20%20return%20100%20*%20difference%20/%20x%0Aresult%20%3D%20percent_difference%2840,%2050%29&codeDivHeight=400&codeDivWidth=350&cumulative=false&curInstr=0&heapPrimitives=nevernest&origin=opt-frontend.js&py=3&rawInputLstJSON=%5B%5D&textReferences=false"> </iframe>

The effect of an assignment statement is to bind a name to a value in the *first* frame of the current environment. As a consequence, assignment statements within a function body cannot affect the global frame. The fact that functions can only manipulate their local environment is critical to creating *modular* programs, in which pure functions interact only via the values they take and return.

Of course, the `percent_difference` function could be written as a single expression, as shown below, but the return expression is more complex.

```python
>>> def percent_difference(x, y):
        return 100 * abs(x-y) / x
>>> percent_difference(40, 50)
25.0
```

So far, local assignment hasn't increased the expressive power of our function definitions. It will do so, when combined with other control statements. In addition, local assignment also plays a critical role in clarifying the meaning of complex expressions by assigning names to intermediate quantities.

## Conditional Statements

Python has a built-in function for computing absolute values.

```python
>>> abs(-2)
2
```

We would like to be able to implement such a function ourselves, but we have no obvious way to define a function that has a comparison and a choice. We would like to express that if `x` is positive, `abs(x)` returns `x`. Furthermore, if `x` is 0, `abs(x)` returns 0. Otherwise, `abs(x)` returns `-x`. In Python, we can express this choice with a conditional statement.

<iframe width="800" height="500" frameborder="0" src="https://pythontutor.com/iframe-embed.html#code=def%20absolute_value%28x%29%3A%0A%20%20%20%20%22%22%22Compute%20abs%28x%29.%22%22%22%0A%20%20%20%20if%20x%20%3E%200%3A%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20return%20x%0A%20%20%20%20elif%20x%20%3D%3D%200%3A%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20return%200%0A%20%20%20%20else%3A%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20return%20-x%0A%0Aresult%20%3D%20absolute_value%28-2%29&codeDivHeight=400&codeDivWidth=350&cumulative=false&curInstr=0&heapPrimitives=nevernest&origin=opt-frontend.js&py=3&rawInputLstJSON=%5B%5D&textReferences=false"> </iframe>

This implementation of `absolute_value` raises several important issues:

**Conditional statements**. A conditional statement in Python consists of a series of headers and suites: a required `if` clause, an optional sequence of `elif` clauses, and finally an optional `else` clause:

```python
if <expression>:
    <suite>
elif <expression>:
    <suite>
else:
    <suite>
```

When executing a conditional statement, each clause is considered in order. The computational process of executing a conditional clause follows.

1. Evaluate the header's expression.
2. If it is a true value, execute the suite. Then, skip over all subsequent clauses in the conditional statement.

If the `else` clause is reached (which only happens if all `if` and `elif` expressions evaluate to false values), its suite is executed.

**Boolean contexts**. Above, the execution procedures mention "a false value" and "a true value." The expressions inside the header statements of conditional blocks are said to be in *boolean contexts*: their truth values matter to control flow, but otherwise their values are not assigned or returned. Python includes several false values, including 0, `None`, and the *boolean* value `False`. All other numbers are true values. In Chapter 2, we will see that every built-in kind of data in Python has both true and false values.

**Boolean values**. Python has two boolean values, called `True` and `False`. Boolean values represent truth values in logical expressions. The built-in comparison operations, `>, <, >=, <=, ==, !=`, return these values.

```python
>>> 4 < 2
False
>>> 5 >= 5
True
```

This second example reads "5 is greater than or equal to 5", and corresponds to the function `ge` in the `operator` module.

```python
>>> 0 == -0
True
```

This final example reads "0 equals -0", and corresponds to `eq` in the `operator` module. Notice that Python distinguishes assignment (`=`) from equality comparison (`==`), a convention shared across many programming languages.

**Boolean operators**. Three basic logical operators are also built into Python:

```python
>>> True and False
False
>>> True or False
True
>>> not False
True
```

Logical expressions have corresponding evaluation procedures. These procedures exploit the fact that the truth value of a logical expression can sometimes be determined without evaluating all of its subexpressions, a feature called *short-circuiting*.

To evaluate the expression `<left> and <right>`:

1. Evaluate the subexpression `<left>`.
2. If the result is a false value `v`, then the expression evaluates to `v`.
3. Otherwise, the expression evaluates to the value of the subexpression `<right>`.

To evaluate the expression `<left> or <right>`:

1. Evaluate the subexpression `<left>`.
2. If the result is a true value `v`, then the expression evaluates to `v`.
3. Otherwise, the expression evaluates to the value of the subexpression `<right>`.

To evaluate the expression `not <exp>`:

1. Evaluate `<exp>`; The value is `True` if the result is a false value, and `False` otherwise.

These values, rules, and operators provide us with a way to combine the results of comparisons. Functions that perform comparisons and return boolean values typically begin with `is`, not followed by an underscore (e.g., `isfinite`, `isdigit`, `isinstance`, etc.).

> False values in Python: False, 0, '', None	(more to come)
> True values in Python: Anything else	(True)

## Iteration

In addition to selecting which statements to execute, control statements are used to express repetition. If each line of code we wrote were only executed once, programming would be a very unproductive exercise. Only through repeated execution of statements do we unlock the full potential of computers. We have already seen one form of repetition: a function can be applied many times, although it is only defined once. Iterative control structures are another mechanism for executing the same statements many times.

Consider the sequence of Fibonacci numbers, in which each number is the sum of the preceding two:

```
0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, ...
```

Each value is constructed by repeatedly applying the sum-previous-two rule. The first and second are fixed to 0 and 1. For instance, the eighth Fibonacci number is 13.

We can use a `while` statement to enumerate `n` Fibonacci numbers. We need to track how many values we've created (`k`), along with the kth value (`curr`) and its predecessor (`pred`). Step through this function and observe how the Fibonacci numbers evolve one by one, bound to `curr`.

<iframe width="800" height="500" frameborder="0" src="https://pythontutor.com/iframe-embed.html#code=def%20fib%28n%29%3A%0A%20%20%20%20%22%22%22Compute%20the%20nth%20Fibonacci%20number,%20for%20n%20%3E%3D%202.%22%22%22%0A%20%20%20%20pred,%20curr%20%3D%200,%201%20%20%20%23%20Fibonacci%20numbers%201%20and%202%0A%20%20%20%20k%20%3D%202%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%23%20Which%20Fib%20number%20is%20curr%3F%0A%20%20%20%20while%20k%20%3C%20n%3A%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20pred,%20curr%20%3D%20curr,%20pred%20%2B%20curr%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20k%20%3D%20k%20%2B%201%0A%20%20%20%20return%20curr%0A%0Aresult%20%3D%20fib%288%29&codeDivHeight=400&codeDivWidth=350&cumulative=false&curInstr=0&heapPrimitives=nevernest&origin=opt-frontend.js&py=3&rawInputLstJSON=%5B%5D&textReferences=false"> </iframe>

Remember that commas seperate multiple names and values in an assignment statement. The line:

```python
pred, curr = curr, pred + curr
```

has the effect of rebinding the name `pred` to the value of `curr`, and simultanously rebinding `curr` to the value of `pred + curr`. All of the expressions to the right of `=` are evaluated before any rebinding takes place.

This order of events -- evaluating everything on the right of `=` before updating any bindings on the left -- is essential for correctness of this function.

A `while` clause contains a header expression followed by a suite:

```python
while <expression>:
    <suite>
```

To execute a `while` clause:

1. Evaluate the header's expression.
2. If it is a true value, execute the suite, then return to step 1.

In step 2, the entire suite of the `while` clause is executed before the header expression is evaluated again.

In order to prevent the suite of a `while` clause from being executed indefinitely, the suite should always change some binding in each pass.

A `while` statement that does not terminate is called an infinite loop. Press `<Control>-C` to force Python to stop looping.

## Testing

*Testing* a function is the act of verifying that the function's behavior matches expectations. Our language of functions is now sufficiently complex that we need to start testing our implementations.

A *test* is a mechanism for systematically performing this verification. Tests typically take the form of another function that contains one or more sample calls to the function being tested. The returned value is then verified against an expected result. Unlike most functions, which are meant to be general, tests involve selecting and validating calls with specific argument values. Tests also serve as documentation: they demonstrate how to call a function and what argument values are appropriate.

**Assertions.** Programmers use `assert` statements to verify expectations, such as the output of a function being tested. An `assert` statement has an expression in a boolean context, followed by a quoted line of text (single or double quotes are both fine, but be consistent) that will be displayed if the expression evaluates to a false value.

```python
>>> assert fib(8) == 13, 'The 8th Fibonacci number should be 13'
```

When the expression being asserted evaluates to a true value, executing an assert statement has no effect. When it is a false value, `assert` causes an error that halts execution.

A test function for `fib` should test several arguments, including extreme values of `n`.

```python
>>> def fib_test():
        assert fib(2) == 1, 'The 2nd Fibonacci number should be 1'
        assert fib(3) == 1, 'The 3rd Fibonacci number should be 1'
        assert fib(50) == 7778742049, 'Error at the 50th Fibonacci number'
```

When writing Python in files, rather than directly into the interpreter, tests are typically written in the same file or a neighboring file with the suffix `_test.py`.

**Doctests.** Python provides a convenient method for placing simple tests directly in the docstring of a function. The first line of a docstring should contain a one-line description of the function, followed by a blank line. A detailed description of arguments and behavior may follow. In addition, the docstring may include a sample interactive session that calls the function:

```python
>>> def sum_naturals(n):
        """Return the sum of the first n natural numbers.

        >>> sum_naturals(10)
        55
        >>> sum_naturals(100)
        5050
        """
        total, k = 0, 1
        while k <= n:
            total, k = total + k, k + 1
        return total
```

Then, the interaction can be verified via the [doctest module](http://docs.python.org/py3k/library/doctest.html). Below, the `globals` function returns a representation of the global environment, which the interpreter needs in order to evaluate expressions.

```python
>>> from doctest import testmod
>>> testmod()
TestResults(failed=0, attempted=2)
```

To verify the doctest interactions for only a single function, we use a `doctest` function called `run_docstring_examples`. This function is (unfortunately) a bit complicated to call. Its first argument is the function to test. The second should always be the result of the expression `globals()`, a built-in function that returns the global environment. The third argument is `True` to indicate that we would like "verbose" output: a catalog of all tests run.

```python
>>> from doctest import run_docstring_examples
>>> run_docstring_examples(sum_naturals, globals(), True)
Finding tests in NoName
Trying:
    sum_naturals(10)
Expecting:
    55
ok
Trying:
    sum_naturals(100)
Expecting:
    5050
ok
```

When the return value of a function does not match the expected result, the `run_docstring_examples` function will report this problem as a test failure.

When writing Python in files, all doctests in a file can be run by starting Python with the doctest command line option:

```sh
python3 -m doctest <python_source_file>
```

The key to effective testing is to write (and run) tests immediately after implementing new functions. It is even good practice to write some tests before you implement, in order to have some example inputs and outputs in your mind. A test that applies a single function is called a *unit test*. Exhaustive unit testing is a hallmark of good program design.

**source ex\.py**

```python
"""Our first Python source file."""

from operator import floordiv, mod

def divide_exact(n, d = 10):
    """Return the quotient and remainder of dividing N by D.

    >>> q, r = divide_exact(2013, 10)
    >>> q
    201
    >>> r
    3
    """
    return floordiv(n, d), mod(n, d)

# q, r = givide_exact(2013, 10)
# print('Quotient:', q)
# print('Remainder:', r)
```

> [!TIP] 
> **Python conmand Tip!**
>
> Load in interactive form: 
>
> ```python
> python3 -i ex.py
> >>> q
> 201
> >>> r
> 3
> ```
>
> doc test: 
>
> ```python
> python3 -m doctest -v ex.py
> Trying:
>     q, r = divide_exact(2013, 10)
> Expecting nothing
> ok
> Trying:
>     q
> Expecting:
>     201
> ok
> Trying:
>     r
> Expecting:
>     3
> ok
> 1 items had no tests:
>     ex
> 1 items passed all tests:
>    3 tests in ex.divide_exact
> 3 tests in 2 items.
> 3 passed and 0 failed.
> Test passed.
> ```

