## Lambda Expressions

So far, each time we have wanted to define a new function, we needed to give it a name. But for other types of expressions, we don't need to associate intermediate values with a name. That is, we can compute `a*b + c*d` without having to name the subexpressions `a*b` or `c*d`, or the full expression. In Python, we can create function values on the fly using `lambda` expressions, which evaluate to unnamed functions. A lambda expression evaluates to a function that has a single return expression as its body. Assignment and control statements are not allowed.

```python
>>> def compose1(f, g):
        return lambda x: f(g(x))
```

We can understand the structure of a `lambda` expression by constructing a corresponding English sentence:

```python
     lambda            x            :          f(g(x))
"A function that    takes x    and returns     f(g(x))"
```

The result of a lambda expression is called a lambda function. It has no intrinsic name (and so Python prints `<lambda>` for the name), but otherwise it behaves like any other function.

```python
>>> s = lambda x: x * x
>>> s
<function <lambda> at 0xf3f490>
>>> s(12)
144
```

In an environment diagram, the result of a lambda expression is a function as well, named with the greek letter λ (lambda). Our compose example can be expressed quite compactly with lambda expressions.

<iframe width="800" height="500" frameborder="0" src="https://pythontutor.com/iframe-embed.html#code=def%20compose1%28f,%20g%29%3A%0A%20%20%20%20return%20lambda%20x%3A%20f%28g%28x%29%29%0A%0Af%20%3D%20compose1%28lambda%20x%3A%20x%20*%20x,%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20lambda%20y%3A%20y%20%2B%201%29%0Aresult%20%3D%20f%2812%29&codeDivHeight=400&codeDivWidth=350&cumulative=false&curInstr=16&heapPrimitives=nevernest&origin=opt-frontend.js&py=3&rawInputLstJSON=%5B%5D&textReferences=false"> </iframe>

Some programmers find that using unnamed functions from lambda expressions to be shorter and more direct. However, compound `lambda` expressions are notoriously illegible, despite their brevity. The following definition is correct, but many programmers have trouble understanding it quickly.

```python
>>> compose1 = lambda f,g: lambda x: f(g(x))
```

In general, Python style prefers explicit `def` statements to lambda expressions, but allows them in cases where a simple function is needed as an argument or return value.

Such stylistic rules are merely guidelines; you can program any way you wish. However, as you write programs, think about the audience of people who might read your program one day. When you can make your program easier to understand, you do those people a favor.

The term *lambda* is a historical accident resulting from the incompatibility of written mathematical notation and the constraints of early type-setting systems.

> It may seem perverse to use lambda to introduce a procedure/function. The notation goes back to Alonzo Church, who in the 1930's started with a "hat" symbol; he wrote the square function as "ŷ . y × y". But frustrated typographers moved the hat to the left of the parameter and changed it to a capital lambda: "Λy . y × y"; from there the capital lambda was changed to lowercase, and now we see "λy . y × y" in math books and `(lambda (y) (* y y))` in Lisp.
>
> —Peter Norvig (norvig.com/lispy2.html)

Despite their unusual etymology, `lambda` expressions and the corresponding formal language for function application, the *lambda calculus*, are fundamental computer science concepts shared far beyond the Python programming community. We will revisit this topic when we study the design of interpreters in Chapter 3.

## Abstractions and First-Class Functions

We began this section with the observation that user-defined functions are a crucial abstraction mechanism, because they permit us to express general methods of computing as explicit elements in our programming language. Now we've seen how higher-order functions permit us to manipulate these general methods to create further abstractions.

As programmers, we should be alert to opportunities to identify the underlying abstractions in our programs, build upon them, and generalize them to create more powerful abstractions. This is not to say that one should always write programs in the most abstract way possible; expert programmers know how to choose the level of abstraction appropriate to their task. But it is important to be able to think in terms of these abstractions, so that we can be ready to apply them in new contexts. The significance of higher-order functions is that they enable us to represent these abstractions explicitly as elements in our programming language, so that they can be handled just like other computational elements.

In general, programming languages impose restrictions on the ways in which computational elements can be manipulated. Elements with the fewest restrictions are said to have first-class status. Some of the "rights and privileges" of first-class elements are:

1. They may be bound to names.
2. They may be passed as arguments to functions.
3. They may be returned as the results of functions.
4. They may be included in data structures.

Python awards functions full first-class status, and the resulting gain in expressive power is enormous.