## Function Decorators

Python provides special syntax to apply higher-order functions as part of executing a `def` statement, called a decorator. Perhaps the most common example is a trace.

```python
>>> def trace(fn):
        def wrapped(x):
            print('-> ', fn, '(', x, ')')
            return fn(x)
        return wrapped
>>> @trace
    def triple(x):
        return 3 * x
>>> triple(12)
->  <function triple at 0x102a39848> ( 12 )
36
```

In this example, A higher-order function `trace` is defined, which returns a function that precedes a call to its argument with a `print` statement that outputs the argument. The `def` statement for `triple` has an annotation, `@trace`, which affects the execution rule for `def`. As usual, the function `triple` is created. However, the name `triple` is not bound to this function. Instead, the name `triple` is bound to the returned function value of calling `trace` on the newly defined `triple` function. In code, this decorator is equivalent to:

```python
>>> def triple(x):
        return 3 * x
>>> triple = trace(triple)
```

In the projects associated with this text, decorators are used for tracing, as well as selecting which functions to call when a program is run from the command line.

**Extra for experts.** The decorator symbol `@` may also be followed by a call expression. The expression following `@` is evaluated first (just as the name `trace` was evaluated above), the `def` statement second, and finally the result of evaluating the decorator expression is applied to the newly defined function, and the result is bound to the name in the `def` statement. A [short tutorial on decorators](http://programmingbits.pythonblogs.com/27_programmingbits/archive/50_function_decorators.html) by Ariel Ortiz gives further examples for interested students.