## Tree Recursion

Another common pattern of computation is called tree recursion, in which a function calls itself more than once. As an example, consider computing the sequence of Fibonacci numbers, in which each number is the sum of the preceding two.

<iframe width="800" height="500" frameborder="0" src="https://pythontutor.com/iframe-embed.html#code=def%20fib%28n%29%3A%0A%20%20%20%20if%20n%20%3D%3D%201%3A%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20return%200%0A%20%20%20%20if%20n%20%3D%3D%202%3A%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20return%201%0A%20%20%20%20else%3A%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20return%20fib%28n-2%29%20%2B%20fib%28n-1%29%0A%0Aresult%20%3D%20fib%286%29&codeDivHeight=400&codeDivWidth=350&cumulative=false&curInstr=0&heapPrimitives=nevernest&origin=opt-frontend.js&py=3&rawInputLstJSON=%5B%5D&textReferences=false"> </iframe>

This recursive definition is tremendously appealing relative to our previous attempts: it exactly mirrors the familiar definition of Fibonacci numbers. A function with multiple recursive calls is said to be *tree recursive* because each call branches into multiple smaller calls, each of which branches into yet smaller calls, just as the branches of a tree become smaller but more numerous as they extend from the trunk.

We were already able to define a function to compute Fibonacci numbers without tree recursion. In fact, our previous attempts were more efficient, a topic discussed later in the text. Next, we consider a problem for which the tree recursive solution is substantially simpler than any iterative alternative.

## Example: Partitions

The number of partitions of a positive integer `n`, using parts up to size `m`, is the number of ways in which `n` can be expressed as the sum of positive integer parts up to `m` in increasing order. For example, the number of partitions of 6 using parts up to 4 is 9.

1. `6 = 2 + 4`
2. `6 = 1 + 1 + 4`
3. `6 = 3 + 3`
4. `6 = 1 + 2 + 3`
5. `6 = 1 + 1 + 1 + 3`
6. `6 = 2 + 2 + 2`
7. `6 = 1 + 1 + 2 + 2`
8. `6 = 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 2`
9. `6 = 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1`

We will define a function `count_partitions(n, m)` that returns the number of different partitions of `n` using parts up to `m`. This function has a simple solution as a tree-recursive function, based on the following observation:

The number of ways to partition `n` using integers up to `m` equals

1. the number of ways to partition `n-m` using integers up to `m`, and
2. the number of ways to partition `n` using integers up to `m-1`.

To see why this is true, observe that all the ways of partitioning `n` can be divided into two groups: those that include at least one `m` and those that do not. Moreover, each partition in the first group is a partition of `n-m`, followed by `m` added at the end. In the example above, the first two partitions contain 4, and the rest do not.

Therefore, we can recursively reduce the problem of partitioning `n` using integers up to `m` into two simpler problems: (1) partition a smaller number `n-m`, and (2) partition with smaller components up to `m-1`.

To complete the implementation, we need to specify the following base cases:

1. There is one way to partition 0: include no parts.
2. There are 0 ways to partition a negative `n`.
3. There are 0 ways to partition any `n` greater than 0 using parts of size 0 or less.

```python
>>> def count_partitions(n, m):
        """Count the ways to partition n using parts up to m."""
        if n == 0:
            return 1
        elif n < 0:
            return 0
        elif m == 0:
            return 0
        else:
            return count_partitions(n-m, m) + count_partitions(n, m-1)
>>> count_partitions(6, 4)
9
>>> count_partitions(5, 5)
7
>>> count_partitions(10, 10)
42
>>> count_partitions(15, 15)
176
>>> count_partitions(20, 20)
627
```

We can think of a tree-recursive function as exploring different possibilities. In this case, we explore the possibility that we use a part of size `m` and the possibility that we do not. The first and second recursive calls correspond to these possibilities.

Implementing this function without recursion would be substantially more involved. 
