# Building Abstractions with Data

## Introduction

We concentrated in Chapter 1 on computational processes and on the role of functions in program design. We saw how to use primitive data (numbers) and primitive operations (arithmetic), how to form compound functions through composition and control, and how to create functional abstractions by giving names to processes. We also saw that higher-order functions enhance the power of our language by enabling us to manipulate, and thereby to reason, in terms of general methods of computation. This is much of the essence of programming.

This chapter focuses on data. The techniques we investigate here will allow us to represent and manipulate information about many different domains. Due to the explosive growth of the Internet, a vast amount of structured information is freely available to all of us online, and computation can be applied to a vast range of different problems. Effective use of built-in and user-defined data types are fundamental to data processing applications.

## Native Data Types

Every value in Python has a *class* that determines what type of value it is. Values that share a class also share behavior. For example, the integers `1` and `2` are both instances of the `int` class. These two values can be treated similarly. For example, they can both be negated or added to another integer. The built-in `type` function allows us to inspect the class of any value.

```python
>>> type(2)
<class 'int'>
```

The values we have used so far are instances of a small number of *native* data types that are built into the Python language. Native data types have the following properties:

1. There are expressions that evaluate to values of native types, called *literals*.
2. There are built-in functions and operators to manipulate values of native types.

The `int` class is the native data type used to represent integers. Integer literals (sequences of adjacent numerals) evaluate to `int` values, and mathematical operators manipulate these values.

```python
>>> 12 + 3000000000000000000000000
3000000000000000000000012
```

Python includes three native numeric types: integers (`int`), real numbers (`float`), and complex numbers (`complex`).

```python
>>> type(1.5)
<class 'float'>
>>> type(1+1j)
<class 'complex'>
```

**Floats.** The name `float` comes from the way in which real numbers are represented in Python and many other programming languages: a "floating point" representation. While the details of how numbers are represented is not a topic for this text, some high-level differences between `int` and `float` objects are important to know. In particular, `int` objects represent integers exactly, without any approximation or limits on their size. On the other hand, `float` objects can represent a wide range of fractional numbers, but not all numbers can be represented exactly, and there are minimum and maximum values. Therefore, `float` values should be treated as approximations to real values. These approximations have only a finite amount of precision. Combining `float` values can lead to approximation errors; both of the following expressions would evaluate to `7` if not for approximation.

```python
>>> 7 / 3 * 3
7.0
>>> 1 / 3 * 7 * 3
6.999999999999999
```

Although `int` values are combined above, dividing one `int` by another yields a `float` value: a truncated finite approximation to the actual ratio of the two integers divided.

```python
>>> type(1/3)
<class 'float'>
>>> 1/3
0.3333333333333333
```

Problems with this approximation appear when we conduct equality tests.

```python
>>> 1/3 == 0.333333333333333312345  # Beware of float approximation
True
```

These subtle differences between the `int` and `float` class have wide-ranging consequences for writing programs, and so they are details that must be memorized by programmers. Fortunately, there are only a handful of native data types, limiting the amount of memorization required to become proficient in a programming language. Moreover, these same details are consistent across many programming languages, enforced by community guidelines such as the [IEEE 754 floating point standard](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IEEE_floating_point).

**Non-numeric types.** Values can represent many other types of data, such as sounds, images, locations, web addresses, network connections, and more. A few are represented by native data types, such as the `bool` class for values `True` and `False`. The type for most values must be defined by programmers using the means of combination and abstraction that we will develop in this chapter.

The following sections introduce more of Python's native data types, focusing on the role they play in creating useful data abstractions. For those interested in further details, a chapter on [native data types](http://getpython3.com/diveintopython3/native-datatypes.html) in the online book Dive Into Python 3 gives a pragmatic overview of all Python's native data types and how to manipulate them, including numerous usage examples and practical tips.

## Data Abstraction

As we consider the wide set of things in the world that we would like to represent in our programs, we find that most of them have compound structure. For example, a geographic position has latitude and longitude coordinates. To represent positions, we would like our programming language to have the capacity to couple together a latitude and longitude to form a pair, a *compound data* value that our programs can manipulate as a single conceptual unit, but which also has two parts that can be considered individually.

The use of compound data enables us to increase the modularity of our programs. If we can manipulate geographic positions as whole values, then we can shield parts of our program that compute using positions from the details of how those positions are represented. The general technique of isolating the parts of a program that deal with how data are represented from the parts that deal with how data are manipulated is a powerful design methodology called *data abstraction*. Data abstraction makes programs much easier to design, maintain, and modify.

Data abstraction is similar in character to functional abstraction. When we create a functional abstraction, the details of how a function is implemented can be suppressed, and the particular function itself can be replaced by any other function with the same overall behavior. In other words, we can make an abstraction that separates the way the function is used from the details of how the function is implemented. Analogously, data abstraction isolates how a compound data value is used from the details of how it is constructed.

The basic idea of data abstraction is to structure programs so that they operate on abstract data. That is, our programs should use data in such a way as to make as few assumptions about the data as possible. At the same time, a concrete data representation is defined as an independent part of the program.

These two parts of a program, the part that operates on abstract data and the part that defines a concrete representation, are connected by a small set of functions that implement abstract data in terms of the concrete representation. To illustrate this technique, we will consider how to design a set of functions for manipulating rational numbers.

## Example: Rational Numbers

A rational number is a ratio of integers, and rational numbers constitute an important sub-class of real numbers. A rational number such as `1/3` or `17/29` is typically written as:

```python
<numerator>/<denominator>
```

where both the `<numerator>` and `<denominator>` are placeholders for integer values. Both parts are needed to exactly characterize the value of the rational number. Actually dividing integers produces a `float` approximation, losing the exact precision of integers.

```python
>>> 1/3
0.3333333333333333
>>> 1/3 == 0.333333333333333300000  # Dividing integers yields an approximation
True
```

However, we can create an exact representation for rational numbers by combining together the numerator and denominator.

We know from using functional abstractions that we can start programming productively before we have an implementation of some parts of our program. Let us begin by assuming that we already have a way of constructing a rational number from a numerator and a denominator. We also assume that, given a rational number, we have a way of selecting its numerator and its denominator component. Let us further assume that the constructor and selectors are available as the following three functions:

- `rational(n, d)` returns the rational number with numerator `n` and denominator `d`.
- `numer(x)` returns the numerator of the rational number `x`.
- `denom(x)` returns the denominator of the rational number `x`.

We are using here a powerful strategy for designing programs: *wishful thinking*. We haven't yet said how a rational number is represented, or how the functions `numer`, `denom`, and `rational` should be implemented. Even so, if we did define these three functions, we could then add, multiply, print, and test equality of rational numbers:

```python
>>> def add_rationals(x, y):
        nx, dx = numer(x), denom(x)
        ny, dy = numer(y), denom(y)
        return rational(nx * dy + ny * dx, dx * dy)
>>> def mul_rationals(x, y):
        return rational(numer(x) * numer(y), denom(x) * denom(y))
>>> def print_rational(x):
        print(numer(x), '/', denom(x))
>>> def rationals_are_equal(x, y):
        return numer(x) * denom(y) == numer(y) * denom(x)
```

Now we have the operations on rational numbers defined in terms of the selector functions `numer` and `denom`, and the constructor function `rational`, but we haven't yet defined these functions. What we need is some way to glue together a numerator and a denominator into a compound value.

## Pairs

To enable us to implement the concrete level of our data abstraction, Python provides a compound structure called a `list`, which can be constructed by placing expressions within square brackets separated by commas. Such an expression is called a list literal.

```python
>>> [10, 20]
[10, 20]
```

The elements of a list can be accessed in two ways. The first way is via our familiar method of multiple assignment, which unpacks a list into its elements and binds each element to a different name.

```python
>>> pair = [10, 20]
>>> pair
[10, 20]
>>> x, y = pair
>>> x
10
>>> y
20
```

A second method for accessing the elements in a list is by the element selection operator, also expressed using square brackets. Unlike a list literal, a square-brackets expression directly following another expression does not evaluate to a `list` value, but instead selects an element from the value of the preceding expression.

```python
>>> pair[0]
10
>>> pair[1]
20
```

Lists in Python (and sequences in most other programming languages) are 0-indexed, meaning that the index 0 selects the first element, index 1 selects the second, and so on. One intuition that supports this indexing convention is that the index represents how far an element is offset from the beginning of the list.

The equivalent function for the element selection operator is called `getitem`, and it also uses 0-indexed positions to select elements from a list.

```python
>>> from operator import getitem
>>> getitem(pair, 0)
10
>>> getitem(pair, 1)
20
```

Two-element lists are not the only method of representing pairs in Python. Any way of bundling two values together into one can be considered a pair. Lists are a common method to do so. Lists can also contain more than two elements, as we will explore later in the chapter.

**Representing Rational Numbers.** We can now represent a rational number as a pair of two integers: a numerator and a denominator.

```python
>>> def rational(n, d):
        return [n, d]
>>> def numer(x):
        return x[0]
>>> def denom(x):
        return x[1]
```

Together with the arithmetic operations we defined earlier, we can manipulate rational numbers with the functions we have defined.

```python
>>> half = rational(1, 2)
>>> print_rational(half)
1 / 2
>>> third = rational(1, 3)
>>> print_rational(mul_rationals(half, third))
1 / 6
>>> print_rational(add_rationals(third, third))
6 / 9
```

As the example above shows, our rational number implementation does not reduce rational numbers to lowest terms. We can remedy this flaw by changing the implementation of `rational`. If we have a function for computing the greatest common denominator of two integers, we can use it to reduce the numerator and the denominator to lowest terms before constructing the pair. As with many useful tools, such a function already exists in the Python Library.

```python
>>> from fractions import gcd
>>> def rational(n, d):
        g = gcd(n, d)
        return (n//g, d//g)
```

The floor division operator, `//`, expresses integer division, which rounds down the fractional part of the result of division. Since we know that `g` divides both `n` and `d` evenly, integer division is exact in this case. This revised `rational` implementation ensures that rationals are expressed in lowest terms.

```python
>>> print_rational(add_rationals(third, third))
2 / 3
```

This improvement was accomplished by changing the constructor without changing any of the functions that implement the actual arithmetic operations.

## Abstraction Barriers

Before continuing with more examples of compound data and data abstraction, let us consider some of the issues raised by the rational number example. We defined operations in terms of a constructor `rational` and selectors `numer` and `denom`. In general, the underlying idea of data abstraction is to identify a basic set of operations in terms of which all manipulations of values of some kind will be expressed, and then to use only those operations in manipulating the data. By restricting the use of operations in this way, it is much easier to change the representation of abstract data without changing the behavior of a program.

For rational numbers, different parts of the program manipulate rational numbers using different operations, as described in this table.

| **Parts of the program that...**                  | **Treat rationals as...**   | **Using only...**                                            |
| :------------------------------------------------ | :-------------------------- | :----------------------------------------------------------- |
| Use rational numbers to perform computation       | whole data values           | `add_rational, mul_rational, rationals_are_equal, print_rational` |
| Create rationals or implement rational operations | numerators and denominators | `rational, numer, denom`                                     |
| Implement selectors and constructor for rationals | two-element lists           | list literals and element selection                          |

In each layer above, the functions in the final column enforce an abstraction barrier. These functions are called by a higher level and implemented using a lower level of abstraction.

An abstraction barrier violation occurs whenever a part of the program that can use a higher level function instead uses a function in a lower level. For example, a function that computes the square of a rational number is best implemented in terms of `mul_rational`, which does not assume anything about the implementation of a rational number.

```python
>>> def square_rational(x):
        return mul_rational(x, x)
```

Referring directly to numerators and denominators would violate one abstraction barrier.

```python
>>> def square_rational_violating_once(x):
        return rational(numer(x) * numer(x), denom(x) * denom(x))
```

Assuming that rationals are represented as two-element lists would violate two abstraction barriers.

```python
>>> def square_rational_violating_twice(x):
        return [x[0] * x[0], x[1] * x[1]]
```

Abstraction barriers make programs easier to maintain and to modify. The fewer functions that depend on a particular representation, the fewer changes are required when one wants to change that representation. All of these implementations of `square_rational` have the correct behavior, but only the first is robust to future changes. The `square_rational` function would not require updating even if we altered the representation of rational numbers. By contrast, `square_rational_violating_once` would need to be changed whenever the selector or constructor signatures changed, and `square_rational_violating_twice` would require updating whenever the implementation of rational numbers changed.

## The Properties of Data

Abstraction barriers shape the way in which we think about data. A valid representation of a rational number is not restricted to any particular implementation (such as a two-element list); it is a value returned by `rational` that can be passed to `numer`, and `denom`. In addition, the appropriate relationship must hold among the constructor and selectors. That is, if we construct a rational number `x` from integers `n` and `d`, then it should be the case that `numer(x)/denom(x)` is equal to `n/d`.

In general, we can express abstract data using a collection of selectors and constructors, together with some behavior conditions. As long as the behavior conditions are met (such as the division property above), the selectors and constructors constitute a valid representation of a kind of data. The implementation details below an abstraction barrier may change, but if the behavior does not, then the data abstraction remains valid, and any program written using this data abstraction will remain correct.

This point of view can be applied broadly, including to the pair values that we used to implement rational numbers. We never actually said much about what a pair was, only that the language supplied the means to create and manipulate lists with two elements. The behavior we require to implement a pair is that it glues two values together. Stated as a behavior condition,

- If a pair `p` was constructed from values `x` and `y`, then `select(p, 0)` returns `x`, and `select(p, 1)` returns `y`.

We don't actually need the `list` type to create pairs. Instead, we can implement two functions `pair` and `select` that fulfill this description just as well as a two-element list.

```python
>>> def pair(x, y):
        """Return a function that represents a pair."""
        def get(index):
            if index == 0:
                return x
            elif index == 1:
                return y
        return get
>>> def select(p, i):
        """Return the element at index i of pair p."""
        return p(i)
```

With this implementation, we can create and manipulate pairs.

```python
>>> p = pair(20, 14)
>>> select(p, 0)
20
>>> select(p, 1)
14
```

This use of higher-order functions corresponds to nothing like our intuitive notion of what data should be. Nevertheless, these functions suffice to represent pairs in our programs. Functions are sufficient to represent compound data.

The point of exhibiting the functional representation of a pair is not that Python actually works this way (lists are implemented more directly, for efficiency reasons) but that it could work this way. The functional representation, although obscure, is a perfectly adequate way to represent pairs, since it fulfills the only conditions that pairs need to fulfill. The practice of data abstraction allows us to switch among representations easily.

## Sequences

A sequence is an ordered collection of values. The sequence is a powerful, fundamental abstraction in computer science. Sequences are not instances of a particular built-in type or abstract data representation, but instead a collection of behaviors that are shared among several different types of data. That is, there are many kinds of sequences, but they all share common behavior. In particular,

**Length.** A sequence has a finite length. An empty sequence has length 0.

**Element selection.** A sequence has an element corresponding to any non-negative integer index less than its length, starting at 0 for the first element.

Python includes several native data types that are sequences, the most important of which is the `list`.

## Lists

A `list` value is a sequence that can have arbitrary length. Lists have a large set of built-in behaviors, along with specific syntax to express those behaviors. We have already seen the list literal, which evaluates to a `list` instance, as well as an element selection expression that evaluates to a value in the list. The built-in `len` function returns the length of a sequence. Below, `digits` is a list with four elements. The element at index 3 is 8.

```python
>>> digits = [1, 8, 2, 8]
>>> len(digits)
4
>>> digits[3]
8
```

Additionally, lists can be added together and multiplied by integers. For sequences, addition and multiplication do not add or multiply elements, but instead combine and replicate the sequences themselves. That is, the `add` function in the `operator` module (and the `+` operator) yields a list that is the concatenation of the added arguments. The `mul` function in `operator` (and the `*` operator) can take a list and an integer `k` to return the list that consists of `k` repetitions of the original list.

```python
>>> [2, 7] + digits * 2
[2, 7, 1, 8, 2, 8, 1, 8, 2, 8]
```

Any values can be included in a list, including another list. Element selection can be applied multiple times in order to select a deeply nested element in a list containing lists.

```python
>>> pairs = [[10, 20], [30, 40]]
>>> pairs[1]
[30, 40]
>>> pairs[1][0]
30
```

## Sequence Iteration

In many cases, we would like to iterate over the elements of a sequence and perform some computation for each element in turn. This pattern is so common that Python has an additional control statement to process sequential data: the `for` statement.

Consider the problem of counting how many times a value appears in a sequence. We can implement a function to compute this count using a `while` loop.

```python
>>> def count(s, value):
        """Count the number of occurrences of value in sequence s."""
        total, index = 0, 0
        while index < len(s):
            if s[index] == value:
                total = total + 1
            index = index + 1
        return total
>>> count(digits, 8)
2
```

The Python `for` statement can simplify this function body by iterating over the element values directly without introducing the name `index` at all.

```python
>>> def count(s, value):
        """Count the number of occurrences of value in sequence s."""
        total = 0
        for elem in s:
            if elem == value:
                total = total + 1
        return total
>>> count(digits, 8)
2
```

A `for` statement consists of a single clause with the form:

```python
for <name> in <expression>:
    <suite>
```

A `for` statement is executed by the following procedure:

1. Evaluate the header `<expression>`, which must yield an iterable value.
2. For each element value in that iterable value, in order:
   1. Bind `<name>` to that value in the current frame.
   2. Execute the `<suite>`.

This execution procedure refers to *iterable values*. Lists are a type of sequence, and sequences are iterable values. Their elements are considered in their sequential order. Python includes other iterable types, but we will focus on sequences for now; the general definition of the term "iterable" appears in the section on iterators in Chapter 4.

An important consequence of this evaluation procedure is that `<name>` will be bound to the last element of the sequence after the `for` statement is executed. The `for` loop introduces yet another way in which the environment can be updated by a statement.

**Sequence unpacking.** A common pattern in programs is to have a sequence of elements that are themselves sequences, but all of a fixed length. A `for` statement may include multiple names in its header to "unpack" each element sequence into its respective elements. For example, we may have a list of two-element lists.

```python
>>> pairs = [[1, 2], [2, 2], [2, 3], [4, 4]]
```

and wish to find the number of these pairs that have the same first and second element.

```python
>>> same_count = 0
```

The following `for` statement with two names in its header will bind each name `x` and `y` to the first and second elements in each pair, respectively.

```python
>>> for x, y in pairs:
        if x == y:
            same_count = same_count + 1
>>> same_count
2
```

This pattern of binding multiple names to multiple values in a fixed-length sequence is called *sequence unpacking*; it is the same pattern that we see in assignment statements that bind multiple names to multiple values.

**Ranges.** A `range` is another built-in type of sequence in Python, which represents a range of integers. Ranges are created with `range`, which takes two integer arguments: the first number and one beyond the last number in the desired range.

```python
>>> range(1, 10)  # Includes 1, but not 10
range(1, 10)
```

Calling the `list` constructor on a range evaluates to a list with the same elements as the range, so that the elements can be easily inspected.

```python
>>> list(range(5, 8))
[5, 6, 7]
```

If only one argument is given, it is interpreted as one beyond the last value for a range that starts at 0.

```python
>>> list(range(4))
[0, 1, 2, 3]
```

Ranges commonly appear as the expression in a `for` header to specify the number of times that the suite should be executed: A common convention is to use a single underscore character for the name in the `for` header if the name is unused in the suite:

```python
>>> for _ in range(3):
        print('Go Bears!')

Go Bears!
Go Bears!
Go Bears!
```

This underscore is just another name in the environment as far as the interpreter is concerned, but has a conventional meaning among programmers that indicates the name will not appear in any future expressions.

## Sequence Processing

Sequences are such a common form of compound data that whole programs are often organized around this single abstraction. Modular components that have sequences as both inputs and outputs can be mixed and matched to perform data processing. Complex components can be defined by chaining together a pipeline of sequence processing operations, each of which is simple and focused.

**List Comprehensions.** Many sequence processing operations can be expressed by evaluating a fixed expression for each element in a sequence and collecting the resulting values in a result sequence. In Python, a list comprehension is an expression that performs such a computation.

```python
>>> odds = [1, 3, 5, 7, 9]
>>> [x+1 for x in odds]
[2, 4, 6, 8, 10]
```

The `for` keyword above is not part of a `for` statement, but instead part of a list comprehension because it is contained within square brackets. The sub-expression `x+1` is evaluated with `x` bound to each element of `odds` in turn, and the resulting values are collected into a list.

Another common sequence processing operation is to select a subset of values that satisfy some condition. List comprehensions can also express this pattern, for instance selecting all elements of `odds` that evenly divide `25`.

```python
>>> [x for x in odds if 25 % x == 0]
[1, 5]
```

The general form of a list comprehension is:

```python
[<map expression> for <name> in <sequence expression> if <filter expression>]
```

To evaluate a list comprehension, Python evaluates the `<sequence expression>`, which must return an iterable value. Then, for each element in order, the element value is bound to `<name>`, the filter expression is evaluated, and if it yields a true value, the map expression is evaluated. The values of the map expression are collected into a list.

**Aggregation.** A third common pattern in sequence processing is to aggregate all values in a sequence into a single value. The built-in functions `sum`, `min`, and `max` are all examples of aggregation functions.

By combining the patterns of evaluating an expression for each element, selecting a subset of elements, and aggregating elements, we can solve problems using a sequence processing approach.

A perfect number is a positive integer that is equal to the sum of its divisors. The divisors of `n` are positive integers less than `n` that divide evenly into `n`. Listing the divisors of `n` can be expressed with a list comprehension.

```python
>>> def divisors(n):
        return [1] + [x for x in range(2, n) if n % x == 0]
>>> divisors(4)
[1, 2]
>>> divisors(12)
[1, 2, 3, 4, 6]
```

Using `divisors`, we can compute all perfect numbers from 1 to 1000 with another list comprehension. (1 is typically considered to be a perfect number as well, but it does not qualify under our definition of `divisors`.)

```python
>>> [n for n in range(1, 1000) if sum(divisors(n)) == n]
[6, 28, 496]
```

We can reuse our definition of `divisors` to solve another problem, finding the minimum perimeter of a rectangle with integer side lengths, given its area. The area of a rectangle is its height times its width. Therefore, given the area and height, we can compute the width. We can assert that both the width and height evenly divide the area to ensure that the side lengths are integers.

```python
>>> def width(area, height):
        assert area % height == 0
        return area // height
```

The perimeter of a rectangle is the sum of its side lengths.

```python
>>> def perimeter(width, height):
        return 2 * width + 2 * height
```

The height of a rectangle with integer side lengths must be a divisor of its area. We can compute the minimum perimeter by considering all heights.

```python
>>> def minimum_perimeter(area):
        heights = divisors(area)
        perimeters = [perimeter(width(area, h), h) for h in heights]
        return min(perimeters)
>>> area = 80
>>> width(area, 5)
16
>>> perimeter(16, 5)
42
>>> perimeter(10, 8)
36
>>> minimum_perimeter(area)
36
>>> [minimum_perimeter(n) for n in range(1, 10)]
[4, 6, 8, 8, 12, 10, 16, 12, 12]
```

**Higher-Order Functions.** The common patterns we have observed in sequence processing can be expressed using higher-order functions. First, evaluating an expression for each element in a sequence can be expressed by applying a function to each element.

```python
>>> def apply_to_all(map_fn, s):
        return [map_fn(x) for x in s]
```

Selecting only elements for which some expression is true can be expressed by applying a function to each element.

```python
>>> def keep_if(filter_fn, s):
        return [x for x in s if filter_fn(x)]
```

Finally, many forms of aggregation can be expressed as repeatedly applying a two-argument function to the `reduced` value so far and each element in turn.

```python
>>> def reduce(reduce_fn, s, initial):
        reduced = initial
        for x in s:
            reduced = reduce_fn(reduced, x)
        return reduced
```

For example, `reduce` can be used to multiply together all elements of a sequence. Using `mul` as the `reduce_fn` and 1 as the `initial` value, `reduce` can be used to multiply together a sequence of numbers.

```python
>>> reduce(mul, [2, 4, 8], 1)
64
```

We can find perfect numbers using these higher-order functions as well.

```python
>>> def divisors_of(n):
        divides_n = lambda x: n % x == 0
        return [1] + keep_if(divides_n, range(2, n))
>>> divisors_of(12)
[1, 2, 3, 4, 6]
>>> from operator import add
>>> def sum_of_divisors(n):
        return reduce(add, divisors_of(n), 0)
>>> def perfect(n):
        return sum_of_divisors(n) == n
>>> keep_if(perfect, range(1, 1000))
[1, 6, 28, 496]
```

**Conventional Names.** In the computer science community, the more common name for `apply_to_all` is `map` and the more common name for `keep_if` is `filter`. In Python, the built-in `map` and `filter` are generalizations of these functions that do not return lists. These functions are discussed in Chapter 4. The definitions above are equivalent to applying the `list` constructor to the result of built-in `map` and `filter` calls.

```python
>>> apply_to_all = lambda map_fn, s: list(map(map_fn, s))
>>> keep_if = lambda filter_fn, s: list(filter(filter_fn, s))
```

The `reduce` function is built into the `functools` module of the Python standard library. In this version, the `initial` argument is optional.

```python
>>> from functools import reduce
>>> from operator import mul
>>> def product(s):
        return reduce(mul, s)
>>> product([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])
120
```

In Python programs, it is more common to use list comprehensions directly rather than higher-order functions, but both approaches to sequence processing are widely used.

## Sequence Abstraction

We have introduced two native data types that satisfy the sequence abstraction: lists and ranges. Both satisfy the conditions with which we began this section: length and element selection. Python includes two more behaviors of sequence types that extend the sequence abstraction.

**Membership.** A value can be tested for membership in a sequence. Python has two operators `in` and `not in` that evaluate to `True` or `False` depending on whether an element appears in a sequence.

```python
>>> digits
[1, 8, 2, 8]
>>> 2 in digits
True
>>> 1828 not in digits
True
```

**Slicing.** Sequences contain smaller sequences within them. A *slice* of a sequence is any contiguous span of the original sequence, designated by a pair of integers. As with the `range` constructor, the first integer indicates the starting index of the slice and the second indicates one beyond the ending index.

In Python, sequence slicing is expressed similarly to element selection, using square brackets. A colon separates the starting and ending indices. Any bound that is omitted is assumed to be an extreme value: 0 for the starting index, and the length of the sequence for the ending index.

```python
>>> digits[0:2]
[1, 8]
>>> digits[1:]
[8, 2, 8]
```

Enumerating these additional behaviors of the Python sequence abstraction gives us an opportunity to reflect upon what constitutes a useful data abstraction in general. The richness of an abstraction (that is, how many behaviors it includes) has consequences. For users of an abstraction, additional behaviors can be helpful. On the other hand, satisfying the requirements of a rich abstraction with a new data type can be challenging. Another negative consequence of rich abstractions is that they take longer for users to learn.

Sequences have a rich abstraction because they are so ubiquitous in computing that learning a few complex behaviors is justified. In general, most user-defined abstractions should be kept as simple as possible.

**Further reading.** Slice notation admits a variety of special cases, such as negative starting values, ending values, and step sizes. A complete description appears in the subsection called [slicing a list](http://getpython3.com/diveintopython3/native-datatypes.html#slicinglists) in Dive Into Python 3. In this chapter, we will only use the basic features described above.